I was around ten when one day I
discovered a box of my father's old
things in it under a bunch of his
college textbooks was a pair of black
cord Roy Bell bottom bands these bands
were awful musty and moth-eaten and of
course I fell in love with them I had
never seen anything like them
until that day all that ever known and
vorn was my school uniform which in fact
I was pretty grateful for because from
quite a young age I'd realized I was
somewhat different
I'd never been one of the boys my age
terrible at sports
possibly the unmanly as little boy ever
I was bullied quite a bit and so I
figured that to survive I would be
invisible and the uniform helped me to
seem no different from any other child
well almost this became my daily prayer
God please make me just like everybody
else I think this went straight to God's
voice mail though and eventually it
became pretty clear that I was not
growing up to be the son that my father
always wanted sorry dad no I was not
going to magically change and over time
I grew less and less sure that I
actually wanted to there for the day
those black cord roy bell bottom pants
came into my life something happened I
didn't see pants
I saw opportunity the very next day I
had to wear them to school come what may
and once I pulled on those god-awful
pants and belted them tight all was
instantly I developed what can only be
called a swagger
all the way to school and then all the
way back because of a sent home at once
I transformed into a little brown rock
star
I finally didn't care anymore that I
could not conform that day I was
suddenly celebrating it that day instead
of being invisible I chose to be looked
at just by wearing something different
that day I discovered the power of what
we wear that day I discovered the power
of fashion and I've been in love with it
ever since
fashion can communicate our differences
to the world for us and with the simple
act of truth I realized that these
differences they stopped being our shame
they became our expressions expressions
of our very unique identities and we
should express ourselves we're what we
want what's the worst that could happen
the Fashion Police are gonna get you for
being so last season yeah well unless
the Fashion Police meant something
entirely different
Nobel Prize laureate Malala survived
Taliban extremists in October 2012
however in October 2017 she faced a
different enemy when online trolls
viciously attacked a photograph that
showed the 20 year old wearing jeans
that day the comments the hatred she
received ranged from how long before the
scars comes off - and I quote that's the
reason the bullet directly targeted her
head a long time ago now when most of us
decide to wear a pair of jeans someplace
like New York London Milan Paris we
possibly don't stop to think that it's a
privilege something that somewhere else
can have consequences
something that can one day be taken away
from us my grandmother was a woman who
took extraordinary pleasure in dressing
up her fashion was colorful and the
color she loved to wear so much was
possibly the only thing that was truly
about her
the one thing she Regency over because
like most other women of a generation in
India she'd never been allowed to exist
beyond what was dictated by custom and
tradition she'd been married at 17 and
after 65 years of marriage when my
grandfather died suddenly one day her
loss was unbearable but that day she was
going to lose something else as well the
one joy she had to wear color in India
according to custom when a Hindu woman
becomes a widow all she's allowed to
wear is white from the day of the death
of her husband no one made my
grandmother wear white however every
woman she'd known who'd outlived a
husband including her mother had done it
this oppression was so internalized so
deep-rooted that she herself refused a
choice she passed away this year and
until the day she died
she continued to wear only white I have
a photograph with her from earlier
happier times in it you can't really see
what she's wearing the photos in black
and white however from the way she's
smiling in it you just know she's very
in color this is also what fashion can
do it has the power to fill us with joy
the joy of freedom to choose for
ourselves how we want to look how we
want to live a freedom worth fighting
for and fighting for freedom protest
comes in many forms videos in India like
my grandmother thousands of them live in
a city culverin
and so it's been a sea of white for
centuries however only as recently as
2013 the videos of friend Arvind have
started to celebrate Holi the Indian
festival of colour which they are
prohibited from participating in on this
one day in March these women take the
traditional coloured powder of the
festival and color each other with every
handful of the powder we throw into the
air they're white saris slowly start to
suffused with colour and they don't stop
until they are completely covered in
every hue of the rainbow that's
forbidden to them the color washes off
the next day however for that moment in
time it's their beautiful disruption
this disruption any kind of dissonance
can be the first gauntlet we throw down
in a battle against oppression and
fashion it can create visual disruption
for us on us literally lessons of
defiance have always been taught by
fashions great revolutionaries its
designers Jean Paul Gautier
taught us that women can be kings Tom
Brown he taught us that men can wear
heels and Alexander McQueen in his
spring 1999 show had two giant robotic
arms in the middle of his runway and
asked the model shalom harlow began to
spin in between them these two giant
arms furtively at first and then
furiously began to spray color onto her
McQueen thus before he took his own life
taught us that this body of ours is a
canvas a canvas we get to paint however
we want somebody who loved this world of
fashion was Kirara knew she he was a
student an actor from Iraq
he loved his vibrant eclectic clothes
however he soon started receiving death
threats for how he looked
he remained unfazed he remained fabulous
until July 2017 when karar was
discovered dead on a busy street in
Baghdad he'd been kidnapped he'd been
tortured and eyewitnesses say that his
body showed multiple wounds stab wounds
2,000 miles away in Peshawar Pakistani
transgender activist Alicia was shot
multiple times in May 2016 she was taken
to the hospital but because she dressed
in women's clothing she was refused
access to either the men's or the
women's Ward's what we choose to wear
can sometimes be literally life and
death and even in death we sometimes
don't get to choose Alicia died that day
and then was buried as a man what kind
of world is this well it's one in which
it's natural to be afraid to be
frightened of the surveillance this
violence against our bodies and what we
wear on them however the greater fear is
that once we surrender blend in and
begin to disappear one after the other
the more normal this first conformity
will look the less shocking the
suppression will feel for the children
we are raising the injustice of today
could become the ordinary of tomorrow
did he get used to this and they too
might begin to see anything different as
a dirty something to be hated something
to be extinguished like lights to be put
out one by one until darkness becomes a
way of life however if I today then
you tomorrow maybe even more of us
someday we embrace our right to look
like ourselves then in a world that's
being violently whitewashed we will
become the pin pricks of color pushing
through much like those videos our
friend oven how den with so many of us
will the crosshairs of a gun be able to
pick out car our Malala Alisha can they
kill us all
the time is now to stand up to stand out
where sameness is safeness but something
as simple as what we wear we can draw
every eye to ourselves to say that there
are differences in this world and there
always will be get used to it and this
we can say without a single word fashion
can give us a language for dissent it
can give us courage fashion can let us
literally wear our courage on our
sleeves so wear it wear it like armor
wear it because it matters and wear it
because you matter thank you
[Applause]